---
layout: post
title: "Detection of identity-by-descent (IBD) segments in population data"
date: 2015-08-31
---
An identity-by-descent (IBD) segment is a continuous segment that delinearates IBD haplotypes, i.e., haplotypes shared by inheritance from a recent common ancestor. The neutral coalescent theory in population genetics implies that all individuals have common ancestry in the distant past. Any given pair of individuals is related through many common ancestors. IBD segment detection intends to find out the most recent, single common ancestor from whom an IBD segment is inherited. Thus, when detecting an IBD segment in population data, the IBD segment must have sufficient length to provide confidence that the segment is not a fusion of multiple short IBD segments from different distant/ancient common ancestors (although some error is often allowed in identifying the segment endpoints). This length constraint is defined as the resolution of IBD segment detection for a data set and it may vary with specific data or detection algorithms.

Closely related individuals have a high proportion of IBD, and their IBD is arranged in long continuous segments. For example, halfsiblings have, on average, IBD sharing across one half of the genome, and the average IBD segment length is 50 centiMorgans (cM) or approximately 50 megabases (Mb). As the relationship becomes more distant, the average proportion of the genome shared identical by descent decreases exponentially, but the average length of an IBD segment, when IBD sharing do occur, remains relatively long. For a pair of individuals separated by m meioses, the average proportion of the genome shared identical by descent (the sum of lengths of IBD segments divided by the length of the genome) owing to that shared ancestry is 1/(2^(m−1)). In contrast, the lengths of IBD segments owing to the shared ancestry are approximately exponentially
distributed with a mean of 100/m cM. In other words, individuals who have shared ancestry through a certain common ancestor 25 generations ago (with 50meioses of separation) almost always share none of their genome identical by descent through that ancestor, but if they do have an IBD segment through that ancestor it will have a mean length of 2 cM (∼2 Mb). Further, although any given pair of unrelated individuals has very little IBD sharing, the total amount of IBD sharing in a big data set with many unrelated individuals (say N, then there will be N(N-1)/2 pairs of individuals), and the total amount per individual, can be large.

<blockquote>Recent IBD is IBD resulting from shared ancestry within the past 25 generations or so. This IBD is in the form of fairly large (approximately 2 Mb or larger) segments, which are often detectable with a dense SNP array or sequence data.</blockquote>

The key idea behind IBD segment detection is haplotype frequency. The underlying principle for all types of detection algorithms is that shared haplotypes of very low frequency are rarely observed in multiple independently sampled individuals and therefore likely to be IBD. This criterion can be applied in several ways. The first is through the length of sharing, which is a proxy for frequency. If two densely genotyped haplotypes are identical at all or most (allowing for some genotyping error) assayed alleles over a very large segment of a chromosome, then the two haplotypes are likely to be identical by descent across the whole segment. The second is a direct use of haplotype frequency: Shared haplotypes with estimated frequency below some threshold are determined to be identical by descent. The third makes use of a population genetics model to infer probability of IBD. Given the frequency of the shared haplotype and a probability model for the IBD process along the chromosome, one can estimate the probability that the individuals are identical by descent at any position on the segment. Unfortunately, empirical data are usually not at the haplotype level but unphased genotypes and we have to estimate haplotypes from genotype data (called haplotyping or phasing). Although most methods allow for errors in haplotype estimation, such errors significantly reduce the power to detect an IBD segment. Therefore, stringent data quality control should be applied beforehand to remove lower-quality variants.

<h2>Specific Methods</h2>
There are several types of methods for detecting IBD segments, including length-based methods, direct frequency-based methods, and probabilistic methods that determine a posterior probability of IBD. Perhaps the simplest approach to IBD segment detection is to look at the genotypes of a pair of (or more) individuals and find long shared segments that are consistent with IBD. Genotypes are consistent with IBD if they have at least one allele in common. For biallelic SNP markers, a pair of genotypes is consistent with IBD unless they are discordant homozygotes. For example, the genotype pair AA/AT is consistent with IBD, whereas the genotype pair AA/TT is not. That said, the detected IBD segments may be false-positive due to, for example, the presence of extended and strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) in the same region,depending on how well the method adjusts for LD. For example, when two markers are in perfect LD (r2 = 1), concordant homozygotes at one position are always accompanied by concordant homozygotes at the other position. This correlation increases the length of IBD-consistent SNPs required to confidently infer recent IBD, and the specific length threshold used depends on the desired tradeoff between false-negative and false-positive results.

Probabilistic approaches have the greatest potential to yield high power with low false-positive rates because they can account for all aspects of the underlying data generation processes. However, it is difficult to incorporate LD into these methods without causing slow computation times.

When comparing methods for IBD segment detection, it is important to consider power to detect IBD segments, false-positive rates, and computational time for a range of sample sizes. Comparison of methods in terms of power without controlling false-positive rate is meaningless, as false-positive rates can differ substantially between methods. Many methods have tuning parameters that allow a trade-off between false-positive rate and power.

<h2>Applications</h2>
When pedigrees are unknown or too large for standard linkage calculations, the relateness patterns of individual samples may not be capaturable using traditional pedigree-based linkage analysis. But this relatedness can be exploited through pedigree-free IBD segement detection, resulting in several advantages of the IBD approach over standard GWAS approach (IBS-based association analysis) to identifying disease-susceptibility variants. Firstly, the patterns of IBD sharing make it possible to disentangle multiple causal variants within an associated region. In other words, IBD mapping tends to have higher power than association testing when multiple rare variants within a gene contribute to disease susceptibility. The multiple-testing adjustment for population-data-based IBD mapping (such as proposed by Browning and Thompson, 2012 or Gusev et al., 2011) is less than for genome-wide single-marker association testing (such as the Bonferroni correction) but more than for family-based linkage analysis. The actual adjustment depends on the resolution of IBD detection. Moreover, the IBD approach delineates more precisely the region (i.e., narrows down to a part of the genome) that should be sequenced and indicates exactly which individuals are carriers, and this is helpful in determining which individuals to sequence. IBD can also be used to determine haplotype phase and to detect sequencing errors that might otherwise lead to false-positive results.

<h2>Future issues</h2>
The field of IBD segment detection has developed rapidly in response to increased density of genetic data along chromosomes. Full sequence data will soon be readily available, and much greater resolution of IBD detection is to be expected in such data. IBD detection in full sequence data will benefit from new methods that make use of rare variants (they are highly informative for IBD and should be utilized) and account for sequencing error rates (sequence data has higher rates of error than SNP array data, which only shows SNPs, so these errors will need to be accommodated) and very recent mutations (they disrupt sequence identity in individuals with recent common ancestry).

In addition, most existing methods for IBD detection consider only pairs of individuals. Existing methods for considering multiple individuals simultaneously are either too slow for large data sets or are fairly ad hoc with less than optimal characteristics.

<h2>References</h2>
<ul>
<li>Browning SR, Thompson EA. 2012. Detecting rare variant associations by identity-by-descent mapping
in case-control studies. Genetics 190:1521–31</li>
<li>Gusev A, Kenny EE, Lowe JK, Salit J, Saxena R, et al. 2011. DASH: a method for identical-by-descent
haplotype mapping uncovers association with recent variation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88:706–17</li>
</ul>
