---
layout: post
title: "Genome maps and genetic mapping"
date: 2015-04-21
---

Like a physical map, a genome map tells people where they are and helps them get where they want to go. It contains a set of landmarks that helps scientists navigate around the genome, such as short DNA sequences, regulatory sites that turn genes on and off, and genes themselves. A genome map today is nothing close to a highly precise road map though. It is more like a map of North America made when Europeans were just beginning to explore the continent. Some parts of the genome have been mapped in great detail, while others remain relatively uncharted territory. It may turn out that a few landmarks on current genome maps appear in the wrong place or at the wrong distance from other landmarks. But over time, as scientists continue to explore the genome frontier, maps will become more accurate and more detailed.

Most everyday maps have length and width, latitude and longitude, like the world around us. But a genome map only has one dimension. It is linear, like the DNA molecules that make up the genome itself. A genome map looks like a straight line with landmarks noted at irregular intervals along it, much like the towns along the map of a highway. The landmarks are usually inscrutable combinations of letters and numbers that stand for genes or other features—for example, D14S72, GATA-P7042, and so on.

a genome map and a genome sequence?

Both are portraits of a genome, but a genome map is less detailed than a genome sequence. A sequence spells out the order of every DNA base in the genome, while a map simply identifies a series of landmarks in the genome.

Sometimes mapping and sequencing are completely separate processes. For example, it's possible to determine the location of a gene—to "map" the gene—without sequencing it. Thus, a map may tell you nothing about the sequence of the genome, and a sequence may tell you nothing about the map.

In other cases, the landmarks on a map are DNA sequences, and mapping is the cousin of sequencing. For example, consider the following sequence:

Genetic mapping is the of . The <a href="http://www.discoveryandinnovation.com/BIOL202/notes/lecture7.html">construction of the first genetic map</a> has an interesting and inspiring story and provide some impoortant insights.

In genetics, a centimorgan (abbreviated cM) or map unit (m.u.) is a unit of recombinant frequency for measuring genetic linkage. It is often used to imply distance along a chromosome. The number of base-pairs it corresponds to varies widely across the genome (different regions of a chromosome have different propensities towards crossover). One centimorgan is equal to a 1% chance that a marker at one genetic locus on a chromosome will be separated from a marker at a second locus due to crossing over in a single generation. In human genome, 1 centimorgan on average represents a distance of about 7.5x10E5 base pairs.


<h2>References</h2>
<ul>
<li><a href="http://www.discoveryandinnovation.com/BIOL202/index.html">BIOL 202 Genetics taught by Dr. Paul SzauterUniversity of New Mexico</a>. Lecture note 7. </li>
<li>Morton, Newton E. "History of genetic mapping." Encyclopedia of Genetics, Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics (2004).</li>
<li><a href="http://www.genomenewsnetwork.org/resources/whats_a_genome/Chp3_1.shtml">GENOME MAP</a>. Genome News Network</li>
</ul>
