---
layout: post
title: "Cluster detection algorithms based on simulated annealing"
date: 2015-12-02
---
<blockquote>My boss is 100 times smarter than me even when he's on medicine, which, according to him, makes him stupid...</blockquote>


Simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983) is a probabilistic procedure for global optimization used in different fields and problems. It consists in performing an exploration of the space of possible states, looking for the global optimum of a function F, say its maximum. Transitions from one state to another occur with probability 1 if F increases after the change, otherwise with a probability exp(β∆F), where ∆F is the decrease of the function and β is an index of stochastic noise, a sort of inverse temperature, which increases after each iteration. The noise reduces the risk that the system gets trapped in local optima. At some stage, the system converges to a stable state, which can be an arbitrarily good approximation of the maximum of F, depending on how many states were explored and how slowly β is varied. 
Simulated annealing was first employed for modularity optimization by Guimer`a et al. (Guimer`a et al., 2004). Its standard implementation (Guimer`a and Amaral, 2005) combines two types of “moves”: local moves, where a single vertex is shifted from one cluster to another, taken at random; global moves, consisting of mergers and splits of communities. Splits can be carried out in several distinct ways. The best performance is achieved if one optimizes the modularity of a bipartition of the cluster, taken as an isolated graph. This is done again with simulated annealing, where one considers only individual vertex movements, and the temperature is decreased until it reaches the running value for the global optimization. Global moves reduce the risk of getting trapped in local minima and they have proven to lead to much better optima than using simply local moves (Massen and Doye, 2005; Medus et al., 2005). In practical applications, one typically combines n^2 local moves with n global ones in one iteration. The method can potentially come very close to the true modularity maximum, but it is slow. The actual complexity cannot be estimated, as it heavily depends on the parameters chosen for the optimization (initial temperature, cooling factor), not only on the graph size. Simulated annealing can be used for small graphs, with up to about 104 vertices.
