---
layout: post
title: "COSI and CoJava"
date: 2015-04-18
---

<code><i>This post is dedicated to <a href="http://www.smithfuneralhomebroadway.com/fh/obituaries/obituary.cfm?o_id=2902785&fh_id=13749">Daniel Thomas Gillis</a>, Kirk's doctoral student and the author of CoJava who suddently and unexpectedly passed away three months ago.</i></code>

The coalescent theory provides an efficient simulation tool for generating DNA samples drawn from populations. 

The <a href="https://popmodels.cancercontrol.cancer.gov/gsr/packages/cosi/">Cosi</a> program (Schaffner et al., 2005) implements a coalescent model similar to the MS program but allows for complex demographic histories and variable recombination rates. Both MS and Cosi implement the standard coalescent approach that simulates genealogical events backward in time. Simulated events typically include the coalescence of two DNA sequences into a single ancestral lineage, recombination within a sequence, or migration between populations. Since all these events are typically rare, coalescent simulators assume that they never occur simultaneously and assume many generations pass between consecutive events. Time between events is explicitly modeled and used to skip over generations with no genealogical events of interest. The algorithm proceeds until all sequences coalesce to their most recent common ancestor (MRCA) and the resulting genealogy is used to place mutation events along the various sequences.

The parameters of cosi are predefined and stored in a separate file named "params". Cosi(v1.2) supports parameters such as mutation rate, gene conversion rate and sequence length. It also allows users to define the sampled populations, their effective population size (in the present) and demographic history, as well as the number of sampled chromosomes.

Coalescent simulations are very well suited to exploratory data analysis. Samples that are simulated under various models (basic and extension, see <a href="http://lybird300.github.io/2015/04/02/coalescent.html">my previous post</a>) can be combined with empirical data to test hypotheses. Let us assume that we observe an unusual pattern of polymorphism in a data set and want to know if it is simply a historical accident or whether it requires a special explanation (such as the existence of selection).We then simulate many possible data sets under a null coalescent model that does not include the factor of interest (for example, selection). Finally,we compare the value of a test statistic obtained from the real data with the distribution of values obtained from the simulated data sets. If patterns that are characteristic of the actual data are rarely seen in the simulations, we reject the null hypothesis. Having rejected the null hypothesis, it is usually possible to propose patterns that are compatible with the actual data. It is typical of population-genetics applications that many alternative hypotheses are possible. It is therefore important to choose carefully the alternatives for characterizing
deviations from the null.

Based on this idea, Cosi was calibrated (i.e., figure out the values of model parameters by fitting the model to some empirical data) using genome-wide human population data for different populations (deCODE genetic map). The resultant model is referred to as the "bestfit" model and the obtained parameter values (default) are listed in Table 1 in <a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1310645/">Schaffner et al's paper</a>.

Major statistics for evaluating the synthetic data and calibrationg the simulator
Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) 
Allele Frequency spectrum



<h2>Performance</h2>
Cosi is suitable for short genomic segments or gene sequences (<2-3Mb) but become very slow for larger regions (> 100Mb). As sequences get longer, many more coalescent, recombination and migration events occur and the time intervals between them diminish. For longer sequences and large sample sizes, little computational efficiency is gained by skipping over uninteresting generations and substantial computational effort is expended tracking recombination events and their positions, and allocating memory to track the many ancestral fragments of each sequence as they repeatedly recombine and coalesce with each other. As genome-wide studies become a reality, efficient tools for simulating large sequences are essential. Thus, it is necessary to improve cosi's performance in this aspect.

An improved algorithm -- <a href="http://csg.sph.umich.edu/liang/genome/">GENOME</a> (While in the standard coalescent algorithm, each coalescence event involves exactly two sequences that coalesce to a common ancestor, in GENOME, multiple sequences can coalesce to a common ancestor simultaneously. The interested readers are also refered to the author's doctoral dissertation -- "Efficient methods for analysis of genome scale data")

Daniel rewrote Cosi in Java and improved the original algorithm in two aspects.

He also incorporated chromosome anomalies into cosi, so CoJava is capable of...inversion, insertion, deletion.

You can find the source codes on <a href="https://github.com/dtgillis/Cojava">Dan's github site</a>. If you are a layman like me, you may want to check out<a href="https://github.com/lybird300/CoJava_linly_nov13">my commentory on Daniel's codes</a> (still working on it). The rest of this post describes how to use CoJava.

book p143 5.5.1.3

<a href="http://omictools.com/cosi-s7679.html">cosi2</a> improves on the speed of existing exact simulators, and permits further speedup in approximate mode while retaining support for selection. cosi2 supports a wide range of demographic scenarios, including recombination hot spots, gene conversion, population size changes, population structure and migration. cosi2 implements coalescent machinery efficiently by tracking only a small subset of the Ancestral Recombination Graph, sampling only relevant recombination events, and using augmented skip lists to represent tracked genetic segments.

<h2>Input parameters</h2>
The parameters of CoJava are mostly the same as those of <a href="http://lybird300.github.io/2015/04/02/cosi-overview.html">Cosi</a>, except for the following:
